## Introduction to Node.js js

Node.js is an open-source, cross-platform JavaScript run-time environment that executes server-side JavaScript code.

Node.js is built on Chrome's V8 JavaScript engine. It uses an event-driven, non-blocking I/O model that makes it lightweight and efficient.

It has its own package ecosystem, called npm (Node Package Manager), which is the largest ecosystem of open-source libraries in the world.

Typical tasks for a server are to handle user requests, open a file on the server, access the database, and return the content to the client. But not all web-servers work the same way. In the case of Node.js, it is important to stress its single-threaded, non-blocking, and asynchronous I/O.

For example, consider this comparison of how PHP handles the events of a file request versus how Node.js handles one.



**PHP:**
1. The server requests a file from the file system.
2. The server waits until the system opens and reads the file.
3. The server returns the data to the client.
4. The server handles the next request.

**Node.js:**
1. The server requests a file from the file system.
2. The server handles the next request.
3. When the system opens and reads the file, the server will return the data to the client.

>**PHP and many other server-side frameworks use the multi-threaded approach which consumes lots of memory and CPU resources. In contrast, Node.js is single threaded and uses the System Events to achieve that through its non-blocking and asynchronous capabilities.**